My first year as a software engineer came to a close sometime in the middle of October, and I have take and little time to reflect on
some of the lessons I have learned over the past year. To be clear, this is more about the __meta__ of software engineering and not really
about the actual technologies learned. This will, hopefully, allow new computer science/IT/boot camp grads to have a leg up on the outside
world, as she is a cruel beast.
### A job is a trade of goods for services
I think of goods as really anything that I receive in order to get me to spend 8 hours a day in a rolly chair in front of a computer screen. The obvious one is the money, but there is also paid time off, health insurance, and 401k matching to name a few. There
are also the not so obvious ones such as learning opportunities, leadership opportunities, and work from home time. I currently get one work from home day a week which is fantastic from a productivity and stress stand point as I get to completely focus on work I have to do and don't have to deal with rush hour traffic at all. Services are the functions I render to the company that employs me. For software engineers this usually includes coding but can also include system administration, as well being on call 24/7 as it does for me one week a month. Then there are yet other items that can fall under either categories such as commute to work, quality of work environment, and quality of coworkers and supervisors. Most of these are hidden until the position has been accepted and being worked. Right now, I really like everyone I work with including my boss which makes that a good. However, my drive to work can really suck and can be upwards of 45 minutes when traffic is bad so I count this one as a service. If I could walk to work I would count my commute as a good. I prioritize goods such that what technologies I work with and am able to learn are most important but I also have quite a bit of student loans so money comes in pretty close afterwards
### Learn how to sell yourself
No, not the street corner kind. This is knowing how to convey your being, in a positive light, to someone. This is your elevator pitch. This is the answer to the first question of most interviews, who are you, what do you do? Being able to nail this opens up a world of opportunities. Anyone you meet is a potential employer, and being able to spit out your passions, your body of work, and what your path forward is in a succinct but exciting way is a big foot in the door. If you can do this in an interview well enough a lot of times the next question will be when can you start or when can you come in for an in person?
### Recruiter's interests are not your own
Don't get me wrong. Recruiters can be swell people and do a lot of the dirty work that goes into finding a new opportunity. However, they are looking out for themselves not you. Which is fine as you should be looking out for you. Recruiters want to get paid which means they just want to place you into any position they see open for their clients. They try to match what they see on your resume to what they have open. They don't try to find what you want or what your dream job is. They just want to match you with an employer that has the highest chance of hiring you. They also want to sell you on the job. Ever noticed how most recruiters will email you saying they have an exciting opportunity and ask if you could call them to talk about it? This is because most recruiters are excellent salesman. They wouldn't last very long if they weren't so they get you to call and then lay on the sweet talk to get you to a phone interview. A way to circumvent this and not waste your time is to ask for the job description via email that way you can objectively look it over and decide whether it is worth your time or not.
### Read the news
Find a couple of journals, news sites or forums that are technology focused and try to read a couple articles a day that interest you as well as make note of trends in top articles. This can be invaluable in order to keep up to date in areas that you are interested in as well as see what things you should be looking into to keep ahead of the curve. Today, this can include smart contracts on a blockchain, recurrent neural networks for natural language processing, the rise of "serverless" APIs or using GraphQL for backend data. Technology moves at a frightening pace and you must be constantly learning in order to ward off becoming obsolete. By keeping track of these things you can more readily decide what is best to learn first depending on where you are trying to go. You can decide whether it is more beneficial to learn Rust or D languages. Whether REST is no longer worth learning because it is being supplanted by GraphQL. The more you know, the better a decision you can make.
### Keep a journal
Life has a way of getting so chaotic, especially when you are working on both professional projects and side projects, that it becomes hard to keep track of everything. It seems sometimes that the only way to stay organized is to keep a journal. A journal is how I keep all my projects on schedule and know where I am in each one. I'll write down short term goals for a project, stuff that can be done in a week and check them off as I finish them. I also write down long term personal goals, usually on a yearly timeline like what technologies I want to learn and how long certain projects should take. I'll also jot down any cool ideas I have for apps.
